All right.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everyone.
So last time we talked about categorical statements.
NOTE CONF
And I ended up trying to convince you that it's
very easy to program categorical statements in Haskell using things
NOTE CONF
that you've already learned.
You didn't seem terribly convinced by the end of the
NOTE CONF
lecture.
So I asked you to go away.
NOTE CONF
Refresh the Haskell you've just learned.
Look at this slide again and come back.
NOTE CONF
Now, if you still wished to talk about it further.
So who has successfully improved their understanding of what I
NOTE CONF
was trying to say here?
Who has unsuccessfully tried to improve.
NOTE CONF
What are the rest of you expecting me to do?
Go over it all again, right.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's not an efficient way to proceed.
So let me get on my high horse and remind
NOTE CONF
you that the key thing about university is that you
do the work.
NOTE CONF
We provide you the stuff with which to do the
work.
NOTE CONF
And as I also said early on, this course keeps
a fairly steady pace up to about week six, where
NOTE CONF
we take a little bit of a break.
So it's really important to keep up.
NOTE CONF
Of course I plan for this, so we're going to
go over it again anyway.
NOTE CONF
But for those of you who aren't really sure what's
going on, you're going to need to speak up and
NOTE CONF
talk about it.
I mean, ideally you can also do that in the
NOTE CONF
tutorial, but we can take maybe five minutes to go
through this again.
NOTE CONF
So you've all seen list comprehension.
And you haven't seen list comprehension again since Tuesday, unless
NOTE CONF
you were one of those people who are going ahead
and doing tutorial two in advance.
NOTE CONF
But in that case, you probably understand this anyway.
So.
NOTE CONF
Who has completely for all?
Let me rephrase that.
NOTE CONF
Who confidently understands this basic Haskell list comprehension?
The simple one with just the X there.
NOTE CONF
More, more.
Any more?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so about one 12:45 third.
The way I think of it is because I'm a
NOTE CONF
mathematician.
So I think of this as Haskell's way of writing
NOTE CONF
the sets that I'm used to writing from school set
theory.
NOTE CONF
But not all school set theory is the same.
So let's think about it from a programming point of
NOTE CONF
view.
This notation is chosen to look like set theory.
NOTE CONF
But Haskell is a program programming language.
So what's it really doing?
NOTE CONF
The construction means here's a set of variable x.
And remember.
NOTE CONF
Does everybody remember what the sign means?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Anybody not remember what this sign means.
Because if you don't you're stuck here okay.
NOTE CONF
So element of same as element.
So look at all the x that are elements of
NOTE CONF
list sorry elements of things.
So this is just taking the list of things and
NOTE CONF
processing them one at a time.
Um so in this case.
NOTE CONF
What did I start with?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Ah.
How many have I got?
NOTE CONF
Oh, Stu w x y z.
Okay, so this is things.
NOTE CONF
That's what we have here.
And the list comprehension.
NOTE CONF
Comprehension is saying look at every x.
That is an element of things.
NOTE CONF
So take these things one at a time.
And this comma here is really just another way of
NOTE CONF
writing.
And we'll see later in the course other situations in
NOTE CONF
which we do that.
So in some ways you might think this is a
NOTE CONF
bit perverse.
Why not.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And But the way you should think about it is
NOTE CONF
here's the list of things we're considering.
And having got a list of things to think about,
NOTE CONF
which is that lot.
We're going to filter them out according to whether they
NOTE CONF
satisfy this property or not.
So here's the list and here's the property or the
NOTE CONF
predicate in our language.
And the predicate says x is a triangle and x
NOTE CONF
is small.
So we're going to go through.
NOTE CONF
Skip back a couple of slides because I had helpful
diagrams.
NOTE CONF
We're going to go through all the things all the
every x in things little X and things and say
NOTE CONF
is it a triangle and small.
And if we do that we find that R isn't.
NOTE CONF
Y is are not a small triangle because it's a
circle.
NOTE CONF
S is a small triangle.
Hopefully T isn't.
NOTE CONF
U isn't, V is.
So then what we've got is a list that has
NOTE CONF
been filtered.
So filtered is a word that is often used to
NOTE CONF
describe this process.
You have a view of a whole list of things,
NOTE CONF
and you want to filter out the ones that you're
interested in.
NOTE CONF
So in this case we're interested in small triangles.
So starting from the list things this list comprehension gives
NOTE CONF
us back the small triangular things which are in this
case s v and x.
NOTE CONF
Does that help with that bit.
Somebody says yes.
NOTE CONF
Anybody say no because I'm not quite sure what more
to say other than go and program it.
NOTE CONF
We'll see many more of these.
And of course you will be doing lots of examples.
NOTE CONF
So this is the basic list comprehension.
Give me a list which comes from a big list
NOTE CONF
and is filtered out to be just the things I'm
interested in.
NOTE CONF
The next thing I did you may not have seen
yet in the Haskell side of the course, but all
NOTE CONF
it's doing is saying, well, instead of giving me the
things that I want, give me the things that I
NOTE CONF
want and apply this predicate to them.
So if I take x and apply is rid of
NOTE CONF
x, I get true or false according as red is
x.
NOTE CONF
So in this case I've got my filtered list s,
v and x, and I'm just returning the value of
NOTE CONF
whether they are red or not.
And in this particular case.
NOTE CONF
V is red and the others are false.
So that gives me back a list of Haskell truth
NOTE CONF
values.
False.
NOTE CONF
True.
False.
NOTE CONF
So that's is red of S, is red of V,
and is red of x.
NOTE CONF
So now I've got a list filtered and I've applied
a function a predicate in this case to it to
NOTE CONF
give me a set of truth values telling me whether
each of the things I'm interested in is red or
NOTE CONF
not.
And the final step is a bit of Haskell magic.
NOTE CONF
So I asked you this last time, but I forget.
Have you already seen the list and function in the
NOTE CONF
FP?
Somebody thinks you have, but many people probably don't remember.
NOTE CONF
So.
If I apply and to.
NOTE CONF
A list.
That's exactly the same as just ending all the lists,
NOTE CONF
all the elements together.
So just taking a list of truth values, of course,
NOTE CONF
because this is a Boolean function.
So it works on truth values.
NOTE CONF
So it's essentially a many place and instead of a
two place and which is very convenient.
NOTE CONF
Um, since we've got the board handy.
What is the value of that Haskell expression and of
NOTE CONF
the empty list?
So I've heard both answers.
NOTE CONF
So let's think about it for about another 10s.
And let's take a vote.
NOTE CONF
So who thinks it's false?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Who thinks it's true?
Majority and quite a large number of people, as usual,
NOTE CONF
who are undecided.
I really wish I had an electroshock mechanism.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So the answer is true.
NOTE CONF
And we will see that coming up again in logic.
Um, I talked did I talk about vacuous for one
NOTE CONF
of you emailed me before the course or earlier in
the course and asked about and of nothing of the
NOTE CONF
empty set?
Um.
NOTE CONF
It's something that took a long while for logic to
decide that the and of no things should be true.
NOTE CONF
But let me give you a bit of intuition now,
and we'll come back to it later in the course.
NOTE CONF
If you think about what and is doing set, theoretically
it's an intersection.
NOTE CONF
So if I have the and of two properties.
Then and is their intersection then if I add a
NOTE CONF
third one.
I need to rub out some stuff because only the
NOTE CONF
bit in the middle is true.
And every time I put another thing in the and
NOTE CONF
fewer and fewer things are true.
So if I in order for that to make sense,
NOTE CONF
when I had no predators in the hand, everything must
have been true.
NOTE CONF
And for those of you who are getting on well
with Haskell and recursion, write out the definition.
NOTE CONF
Implement the and the list and function in terms of
the binary and function and standard list definitions and see
NOTE CONF
what you do, what what you get there.
But we're only not thinking about that right now.
NOTE CONF
We will think about this later on.
So we have and just as an operator, which takes
NOTE CONF
a list of truth values and collapses them together by
applying and between all of them.
NOTE CONF
So what's this statement now saying?
It's saying that's is red and V is red and
NOTE CONF
X is red, which is false because S is not
red.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, that's enough because it's a list of
ands.
NOTE CONF
As soon as you see a false value, you know
that it's going to be false.
NOTE CONF
But what we've done here is take this quantifier first
order looking thing every, which is a nasty, complicated thing
NOTE CONF
and turned it into a many place.
And and we'll be doing that all the time because
NOTE CONF
they're fundamentally the same and corresponds to every for all
in the same way that or corresponds to there exists
NOTE CONF
or some.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Does that help a little bit for some of you?
Some.
NOTE CONF
Probably the best I can hope.
Well, the rest of you.
NOTE CONF
So you're going to do the tutorial so you will
be forced to think about it.
NOTE CONF
Use Piazza as and when you have doubts or questions.
As always.
NOTE CONF
And because time is finite, I will go on to
what is really the main topic.
NOTE CONF
So this is by way of an example, because we're
going to use this Haskell example in order to check
NOTE CONF
our understanding of logic and to show how logic can
be programmed.
NOTE CONF
So Haskell is a 1980s, if I remember rightly, programming
language.
NOTE CONF
Now we're back in 2300 BC, and this is a
translation of the slightly unhelpful definition, or rather, it's a
NOTE CONF
slightly unhelpful translation of a definition from Aristotle of what
a syllogism is.
NOTE CONF
A syllogism is discourse.
In the original word there was logos, this word for
NOTE CONF
reasoning, discourse, any thing to do with words.
A syllogism is discourse in which certain things being stated.
NOTE CONF
So you make some assumptions and state them something other
than what is stated.
NOTE CONF
So you try to show something new follows of necessity
from those things.
NOTE CONF
This is a very 19th century translation.
I think we might translate it differently today.
NOTE CONF
So here is the classic example, slightly adapted for modern
sensibilities.
NOTE CONF
So the standard example of a syllogism goes like this.
All Greeks are human.
NOTE CONF
I think I know some cats who might disagree with
that, but never mind.
NOTE CONF
So for our purposes, all Greeks are human.
All humans are mortal.
NOTE CONF
Which is true despite Elon Musk and Co's best efforts
so far.
NOTE CONF
From that, it follows that all Greeks are mortal.
Do you all accept that as a valid piece of
NOTE CONF
reasoning?
Does anybody have any doubts about it as a valid
NOTE CONF
piece of reasoning.
Is to say.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, all payments increase.
Ah, yes.
NOTE CONF
So not all humans are Greeks.
But of course it's not saying all humans are Greek,
NOTE CONF
so it's not making a statement about humans.
So the fact that all X or y is completely
NOTE CONF
different from all y or x is important.
Um, this does of course assume.
NOTE CONF
Well, no, it doesn't assume anything.
For this to make sense to us, we assume that
NOTE CONF
Greeks, human and mortal, have their usual meanings.
But could you put any set of adjectives or nouns
NOTE CONF
in the appropriate places for Greeks, human and mortal?
And this would still make sense.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so all footballs are bars, all bars of foobar,
therefore all verbals are foobar.
NOTE CONF
Valid reasoning.
Although It is intentionally nonsensical.
NOTE CONF
So that's what logic is about producing rules of reasoning
that are valid in all universes, whatever the actual meanings
NOTE CONF
of these things are.
Um, just as an aside, I said this was a
NOTE CONF
slight variation of the classic example of the English version
of the classic example.
NOTE CONF
Any guesses on what the standard wording of this was?
Up to about 1970.
NOTE CONF
So yep, all Greeks are men.
All men are immortal.
NOTE CONF
Therefore, all Greeks immortal.
And if you want, that wasn't just standard sexism of
NOTE CONF
Europeans.
Go back and read about the position of women in
NOTE CONF
ancient Greek society.
Um, they were not actually fully human in the perception
NOTE CONF
of the time.
But I don't think Aristotle actually said that.
NOTE CONF
I think he used a word which just meant human,
but it then got translated.
NOTE CONF
There are many, many, many ways to write a syllogism.
So this is one way of writing it as a
NOTE CONF
piece of set theory.
And this goes back to what you were saying just
NOTE CONF
now about Greeks and humans and the other way round.
So here I'm writing this as a piece of set
NOTE CONF
theoretic notation.
You should be able to read this fluently by now,
NOTE CONF
because we asked you to revise set theory or learn
it if you didn't get it at school.
NOTE CONF
So if you don't read this fluently, try to get
to a point where you do it says the set
NOTE CONF
of x such that x is our Greek is a
subset of the set of x such that x is
NOTE CONF
a human.
In other words, all Greeks are human.
NOTE CONF
And then the rest of it is just the same.
So the reasoning is the same.
NOTE CONF
All I've done is change the language I'm using to
describe the categorical statements.
NOTE CONF
Modern logic, or at least in modern logic, as we're
going to write it in this course, we tend to
NOTE CONF
write it like this.
So here we've missed out the x.
NOTE CONF
We've taken the x out of the equation.
And instead of using nouns like Greeks, we're just using
NOTE CONF
predicates everywhere.
So out here there is some kind of implicit well
NOTE CONF
actually out here for all x x is Greek, implies
x is human and x is human, implies x is
NOTE CONF
mortal and x is Greek implies X is mortal.
So the sand, the modern logical notation has this horizontal
NOTE CONF
line.
And what's above the line is the stuff we're assuming.
NOTE CONF
And what's below the line is the stuff we're claiming
to be true as a consequence or in traditional language
NOTE CONF
premises and conclusion or consequence.
So this this statement here, this symbol here is pronounced
NOTE CONF
in various ways, I may sometimes say implies I may
sometimes say entails.
NOTE CONF
Um, both of them are slightly awkward because it's being
used in a sense subtly different from either of the
NOTE CONF
other senses of the word.
But think of this as being a statement that if
NOTE CONF
the predicate Greek implies the predicate human in the sense
that for any x Greek of x implies human of
NOTE CONF
x, and that's what this means.
Does it matter what language you write it in?
NOTE CONF
Well, not really, because it all means the same.
But the advantage of a formal notation is that there
NOTE CONF
is no room for arguing about what the English means.
And we'll see later on.
NOTE CONF
Well, actually, even in this example, there is some room
for arguing about what the English means, but we will
NOTE CONF
come to that a bit later.
Um, so a few minutes ago I said, does it
NOTE CONF
matter what symbols we use?
If this is a valid piece of reasoning for Greek,
NOTE CONF
human and mortal, then it's a valid piece of reasoning
for verbal bangers and foobar or whatever I said.
NOTE CONF
So we can write it symbolically saying if A entails
B and b entails C, then A entails C, whatever
NOTE CONF
actual values predicates we plug in for A, B, and
C.
NOTE CONF
So we've introduced a bunch of new notation.
Any questions about this notation and what it means?
NOTE CONF
Anybody unclear about the meaning of the basic syllogism?
Sorry the hypothetical.
NOTE CONF
Is it the same as a hypothetical syllogism?
I don't know, because I don't know what a hypothetical
NOTE CONF
syllogism is.
It sounds like a piece of philosophy.
NOTE CONF
Um.
It's so if you ask me.
NOTE CONF
P implies q, q implies f, p implies f s
or whatever.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So that's the same.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the reason I'm being slightly cautious is because
there is an x implicit in here.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if you say p implies q and q implies
r.
NOTE CONF
Therefore p implies r.
That's a statement of propositional logic as well.
NOTE CONF
So are we talking about propositions or are we talking
about predicates.
NOTE CONF
So if you do propositional logic.
Then this is a valid rule of propositional logic.
NOTE CONF
And we're doing exactly the same thing.
But we're lifting it up to talk about predicates which
NOTE CONF
apply to objects and not just about simple propositions.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's a very good question.
Um, can you have more than one predicate on the
NOTE CONF
right side here, you mean.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
We will come to that.
Do you want to hazard a guess as to what
NOTE CONF
it might mean now?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So we will see a bit later that we can
put multiple predicates on the left and multiple predicates on
NOTE CONF
the right.
But for the moment, we're going to stick to the
NOTE CONF
classic Greek full form, Aristotle's form, where we just have
one on the left and one on the right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, now I think we agreed when I first brought
the syllogism up, that this is a piece of valid
NOTE CONF
reasoning.
Whatever A, B, and C are.
NOTE CONF
I don't think there's any logic you would want to
work with, in which case in which this is not
NOTE CONF
a good piece of reasoning because it would be a
very strange world.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's the syllogism.
Syllogisms are what we're going to be working with for
NOTE CONF
the next couple of weeks.
And the first thing I'm going to do with them
NOTE CONF
is do a slight diversion into some pictures again, and
discuss a way of checking a syllogism, or indeed another
NOTE CONF
logical statement to work out whether it's sound or not.
And this is actually a reasonably sophisticated piece of graphical
NOTE CONF
reasoning that we're going to introduce.
So let's hope it works.
NOTE CONF
So remember what I did last time I said that
if we're trying to determine whether every red triangle is
NOTE CONF
small in a particular universe, like the universe of things,
then we did something like, look at the red region,
NOTE CONF
look at the triangular region, and see if there was
anything that was outside the small region.
NOTE CONF
So we were looking for a counterexample.
That was something we did with one particular universe.
NOTE CONF
I suggested that maybe that's how we think about it
when we do it.
NOTE CONF
How can we make it more abstract?
Well, what is a Venn diagram?
NOTE CONF
I suppose the first question is, does everybody remember exactly
what a Venn diagram is?
NOTE CONF
Who can remember the difference between a Venn diagram and
an Euler diagram?
NOTE CONF
Well, that's fair enough, because I didn't know the difference
until I started teaching this course, and I'm not sure
NOTE CONF
I ever had known it.
You will see Euler diagrams used sometime.
NOTE CONF
The main difference is that they don't include the whole
universe.
NOTE CONF
So this is the whole universe.
Here we have the three properties within the universe the
NOTE CONF
A things, the B things and the C things.
And that gives us eight possible regions as we were
NOTE CONF
talking in the first lecture about coding stuff.
And so we can naturally give a binary code to
NOTE CONF
each of the regions of the diagram.
So this stuff is the outside and it's 000 because
NOTE CONF
it's where A is false, B is false, and C
is false.
NOTE CONF
This region here is 011 because it's where A is
false, B is true and c is true and so
NOTE CONF
on.
So we have a nice simple binary notation to describe
NOTE CONF
the eight regions of a Venn diagram.
And we can think about programming that up.
NOTE CONF
And I don't think I'm going to make you programming
it up.
NOTE CONF
But it's quite fun to do.
So having got a way to talk about all the
NOTE CONF
possible combinations of three Predicates or three properties.
Rather, predicates say, then we can use a Venn diagram
NOTE CONF
to do reasoning about the relationship between them.
And it works because the Venn diagram covers every possible
NOTE CONF
way that the properties can combine in truth, true and
false.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to introduce a bunch of notational conventions.
These are not universal notational conventions.
NOTE CONF
You might see different ones elsewhere, but hopefully in this
course we will be fairly consistent.
NOTE CONF
So when I draw a diagram like this, I'm going
to use light grey shading like this to indicate graphically
NOTE CONF
that this region here has nothing in it.
What is this region?
NOTE CONF
It's where A is false and B is true and
C is true.
NOTE CONF
So this is the assertion that there are no objects
in this region.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
With that.
NOTE CONF
As a notation.
Hopefully it's intuitive.
NOTE CONF
That says you can't go there.
Sometimes I want to say that there is something in
NOTE CONF
one of these regions.
And the notation there is a slightly trickier.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to choose a random letter like x
and write it in there.
NOTE CONF
And what I mean by doing that in this form
of reasoning is to say that there is something in
NOTE CONF
this region here, which is where A is true and
B is true, and C is false.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's Venn diagrams and two pieces of notation for
NOTE CONF
talking about whether there is something in a region.
And if you're reading textbooks you will see people use
NOTE CONF
the word inhabited to say is a region inhabited or
not?
NOTE CONF
It's not okay as a piece of notation.
Any questions?
NOTE CONF
We'll see.
There is a question you might ask, but we'll probably
NOTE CONF
come to it.
Why am I doing this?
NOTE CONF
Well, I'm doing this because I want to introduce Venn
diagrams as a way to look at something which somebody
NOTE CONF
claims to be a syllogism and work out whether it
is or not.
NOTE CONF
There are many other ways of doing that.
We will see two others at least.
NOTE CONF
So here's my categorical statement.
This says A entails B, or in other words, every
NOTE CONF
A is B.
Here's a large number of other ways of saying it.
NOTE CONF
But this is every a is B a entail speed?
So if we look at the Venn diagram for A
NOTE CONF
and B it's got these four regions.
And what are we saying when we say A entails
NOTE CONF
B.
We're saying that region has nothing in it.
NOTE CONF
So this is the region where A is true and
B is false.
NOTE CONF
That's exactly what is ruled out by the statement that
every A is B.
NOTE CONF
So if every Greek is human, this region is the
region of non-human Greeks.
NOTE CONF
So what do you think?
It's reasonable to say that this Venn diagram captures exactly
NOTE CONF
the meaning of this statement.
And.
NOTE CONF
Distinct shortage of nods.
Are you willing to believe me for the moment until
NOTE CONF
you've had a chance for it to sink in?
So let me remind you of the general idea of
NOTE CONF
lectures.
It's not necessarily the case that you're going to understand
NOTE CONF
everything in the first time.
But when you go back through it, which you do,
NOTE CONF
don't you?
And incidentally, one of the ways I screwed up badly,
NOTE CONF
as I told you, was by not going through lectures
afterwards.
NOTE CONF
So do make a habit of it.
Um, so if this is an interpretation of the categorical
NOTE CONF
statement, every A is B, then maybe we can interpret
syllogisms by plugging together diagrams.
NOTE CONF
So here's an attempt to look at the classic syllogism
and represent it as some diagrams.
NOTE CONF
Every a is B.
Every b is C, every A is C.
NOTE CONF
Here are the three diagrams.
The three individual diagrams.
NOTE CONF
Every a is B, every b is C for C.
How do I plug Venn diagrams together?
NOTE CONF
Um, if I were slightly better at doing fancy slides,
this would be animated, but there are limits to my
NOTE CONF
patience.
So it isn't animated makes life easier if we rotate
NOTE CONF
the diagrams a bit so that we can bring them
together.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to rotate that diagram and rotate that
diagram.
NOTE CONF
What happens if I merge these two.
So B is shared between the two diagrams.
NOTE CONF
And a and C are separate.
So I can represent them as a merged diagram like
NOTE CONF
that.
Why are the shadings of this region as they are.
NOTE CONF
So if I look at this region here, why is
there nothing in it?
NOTE CONF
Does it corresponds to there?
All right.
NOTE CONF
So it's ruled out by that bit which we can't
see over there.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, this one has nothing ruling it
out.
NOTE CONF
So.
This is a way of combining a diagram for two
NOTE CONF
propositions into a diagram that expresses both of them at
the same time.
NOTE CONF
How do we extract the bottom one?
So the logic we're trying to prove is that A
NOTE CONF
entails c every a is C.
Sorry, every Greek is mortal.
NOTE CONF
So what we do is we take the B and
we pull it out.
NOTE CONF
So if B disappears what happens?
Well you might think that this happens.
NOTE CONF
So I've just removed B from the diagram.
But what I'm left with now is this region which
NOTE CONF
is half empty and half not necessarily empty.
If I have a region, half of which is empty
NOTE CONF
and half of which is not necessarily empty, what can
I say about the whole region?
NOTE CONF
So we are not necessarily empty.
So this is actually the same as that.
NOTE CONF
Um, the way I sometimes like to think about this
is that this is all about white paint.
NOTE CONF
When I pull the B away, the white paint spills
out and covers the rest of the region because white
NOTE CONF
paint is good stuff.
Using lots of stereotypes about colours and it spreads.
NOTE CONF
It means there might be something here.
And so if you remove a barrier between a white
NOTE CONF
bit and a grey bit, the white flows out into
the grey bit.
NOTE CONF
Being a nice solid covering paint.
And this process, each step of it made sense.
NOTE CONF
So I conclude from that that if A entails B
and b entails C, I plug them together.
NOTE CONF
Takeaway b I get this diagram.
And this is the diagram for A entails C.
NOTE CONF
So my graphical reasoning technique has produced the same answer
as the statement of the syllogism there.
NOTE CONF
And therefore I conclude that this syllogism is sound in
any universe.
NOTE CONF
You will be doing a bit of practice of this.
It's interesting.
NOTE CONF
Why is it interesting?
Partly because reasoning with diagrams is something that all mathematicians
NOTE CONF
do, but is not something that all mathematicians write down
in the published paper.
NOTE CONF
Because when you draw stuff, you're not being precise most
of the time.
NOTE CONF
And it's interesting to think about whether it's possible to
reason with diagrams in a way that is precise.
NOTE CONF
And what we're doing here can be turned into something
that is precise.
NOTE CONF
And for those of you who like that kind of
thing.
NOTE CONF
Go away and think about making this more precise.
For example, by programming it, implement Venn diagrams.
NOTE CONF
Think of a way of doing it.
But for the rest of you, this is a way
NOTE CONF
of saying, if I have a syllogism, is it sound
or not?
NOTE CONF
And we'll see examples of variations on syllogisms that are
not sound.
NOTE CONF
So I'll come back to that when I've got some
more examples.
NOTE CONF
But now I want to introduce you to a very
important word, a very important name.
NOTE CONF
This syllogism here is the one we've been talking about
so far.
NOTE CONF
The only example you've seen so far has a name,
and its name is Barbara.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to explain why it's called Barbara until
later.
NOTE CONF
If you have a burning desire to find out right
now.
NOTE CONF
Well, preferably not right now, preferably after the lecture.
If you really want to know why it's called Barbara?
NOTE CONF
Go and look in Wikipedia.
But be prepared for a substantial time of confusion, because
NOTE CONF
ancient logic was much harder to deal with than modern
logic.
NOTE CONF
But I will explain this in week six, I think,
for anybody who wants to.
NOTE CONF
And because this is, in a sense, the fundamental syllogism,
it's quite useful to have a name for it.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to call it Barbara all over the
time.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it has the form that if the premises
of the things above the line are valid, then the
NOTE CONF
conclusion below the line is valid.
So this is the simplest form of syllogism.
NOTE CONF
It's all A or b, all B, A, C or
ASC.
NOTE CONF
What other statements can we make?
Instead of saying all A or B, we can say
NOTE CONF
no a is B um.
Thank you for plausible.
NOTE CONF
No.
No reptile has fur.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Which is currently true.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is also a statement that is asserting a
universally true statement in the universe.
NOTE CONF
So in the universe we live in, reptiles do not
have fur.
NOTE CONF
So if you give me a reptile, I can tell
you it doesn't have fur without looking at it.
NOTE CONF
But from our point of view, this is really the
same as saying every A is not B, every reptile
NOTE CONF
does not have fur and is not furry.
So from a modern point of view it doesn't look
NOTE CONF
very different.
But from Aristotle's point of view, it did look different
NOTE CONF
because he didn't have the modern, refined understanding of how
negation works, and he understood perfectly well how it worked.
NOTE CONF
But he didn't look at it in quite the same
way as we do.
NOTE CONF
So here's an example.
Oh, look, it's an example of a syllogism involving reptiles,
NOTE CONF
snakes and fur.
All snakes are reptiles and tails are no reptile has
NOTE CONF
fur.
Ah entails not f no.
NOTE CONF
Therefore no snake has fur S entails not f.
Is this just an instance of Barbara that we've been
NOTE CONF
discussing?
Lots of nods.
NOTE CONF
Anybody disagree?
Anybody think of a way that they could disagree if
NOTE CONF
they were feeling like being awkward?
Okay, well, Let's.
NOTE CONF
Should be able to think of a way to try
to argue against it.
NOTE CONF
Um, it works for us.
Because for us, not F is a predicate.
NOTE CONF
So being not furry is just as good a predicate
as being furry is.
NOTE CONF
And where Aristotle differed is that he didn't have a
way of building new predicates out of old ones.
NOTE CONF
So he didn't have the idea that there was a
predicate, not furry.
NOTE CONF
He didn't have the idea that there was a single
predicate Greek and mortal, and that made everything much more
NOTE CONF
complicated.
So for us, it is an instance of Barbara, because
NOTE CONF
a negated predicate is also a predicate.
And there was actually another reason why Aristotle didn't quite
NOTE CONF
understand negation in the sense that we do, and we
will come on to that later as an optional exercise.
NOTE CONF
So if you were learning logic 600 years ago instead
of now, this would not have been called Barbara.
NOTE CONF
It would have been called, depending on which country in
Europe you were in, sell or rent or rent.
NOTE CONF
Um.
We'll actually chill out and chill out and and cellar
NOTE CONF
and.
Um, but for us, it looks like the standard proposition.
NOTE CONF
So what do universal statements look like in Venn diagrams?
Here's the one we've already seen.
NOTE CONF
Every A is B and no A is B, so
no A is B says the middle is empty.
NOTE CONF
There is nothing that is both A and B here
I've got a entails B here I've got a entails,
NOTE CONF
not B.
There are two other things I could do.
NOTE CONF
I could write not A entails B and I could
write Not A entails, not B.
NOTE CONF
So if I draw the Venn diagrams for those statements,
I get that.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So not A entails B that says that if if
NOTE CONF
I'm outside A, then I must be in B, so
that means there is no completely outside region.
NOTE CONF
Nothing is in there.
And this says if A is not true, if I'm
NOTE CONF
outside A, then B must not be true.
So that region is empty.
NOTE CONF
Um, just looking at these diagrams, what do you notice
about them?
NOTE CONF
That's haven't had anything from the back recently.
Somebody from the back noticed something.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
They are mirror images.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of symmetry here.
So these two are mirror images of each other.
NOTE CONF
And these two aren't mirror images.
But there's something going on.
NOTE CONF
This is a blanking out the middle and this is
blanking out the outside.
NOTE CONF
So if we look at these two these are the
exact mirror images.
NOTE CONF
So A entails B is the mirror image of not
A entails not B.
NOTE CONF
If I now swapped b and A here.
So suppose I wrote not B entails not a, what
NOTE CONF
diagram would I get.
The first one.
NOTE CONF
So this tells us that not B entails sorry, not
a entails.
NOTE CONF
Not B is the same thing as B entails A.
This is a very, very useful piece of reasoning, and
NOTE CONF
it's one that the lawyer I've been moaning about did
not understand.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this said, if all non Greeks are non-human,
then all humans are Greek, which is would be surprising.
NOTE CONF
If you've done proofs in mathematics.
So some of you have done proof in mathematics at
NOTE CONF
schools.
Some of you have not really done proofs in the
NOTE CONF
modern sense, but you are doing them because you're going
to get proofs throughout first and second year maths.
NOTE CONF
Then it's often useful to take a statement of I
know a I'm trying to prove be.
NOTE CONF
I try instead to say, if not be holds, then
let me show that not A holds.
NOTE CONF
So that's called proof by contra position.
You try to prove the opposite direction, but you have
NOTE CONF
to negate things.
So we will see this happening again and again and
NOTE CONF
again in many cases.
The other thing we can see is that these two
NOTE CONF
diagrams are mirror images of themselves.
So this is symmetrical.
NOTE CONF
It's its own mirror image.
And so is this.
NOTE CONF
So that tells us that if we swap A and
B it's still the same.
NOTE CONF
So A entails not B is the same as b
entails, not A.
NOTE CONF
They are again contra positives.
Likewise down here not A entails B is the same
NOTE CONF
as not B entails A, so you will be getting
used to flipping these back and forward time and again.
NOTE CONF
And we'll talk a little bit more about the theory
of it next week.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm going to.
Keep going for a little bit.
NOTE CONF
So what's going on here.
What's going on here is that we're using negation.
NOTE CONF
And we're also flipping things from one side of and
tail sign to another.
NOTE CONF
So negation and composition are intimately linked.
And this is one of the things that Aristotle didn't
NOTE CONF
completely get.
Fortunately, we have a nice idea of negation that works
NOTE CONF
well.
So in modern logic and in several modern languages, then
NOTE CONF
we have the law of double negation.
We discussed that in the first lecture.
NOTE CONF
In logic, if I say not, not a, then that's
the same as a if not, not Greek is the
NOTE CONF
same as Greek.
And I asked you to think about that so you
NOTE CONF
can discuss it in tutorials if you did think about
it.
NOTE CONF
So the law of composition, which describes what I was
doing in those diagrams, says that if A entails B
NOTE CONF
is true, then not B entails not A is true
and the other way round.
NOTE CONF
So this is an if f does anybody not recognise
I f?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's a very convenient abbreviation that mathematicians use all the
NOTE CONF
time.
We pronounce it as if and only if and it
NOTE CONF
means and if that goes both ways.
So if I write p if q that means if
NOTE CONF
p then q and also if q then p.
So that means that p and q have the same
NOTE CONF
truth values.
They're the same.
NOTE CONF
So it's not this one way.
If that was confusing people earlier on.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So well-behaved mathematicians will read it out as if and
NOTE CONF
only if mathematicians who are getting fed up might just
say if.
NOTE CONF
So what we have here is a piece of reasoning
from contribution contribution that says a if A entails B
NOTE CONF
if and only if not B entails not A if
and only if not, not A entails not not b.
NOTE CONF
That's.
And then I apply the law of double negation.
NOTE CONF
And then that gets me to a entails b again.
So by combining these two things I can say that
NOTE CONF
these two statements are exactly the same.
From this I can deduce this.
NOTE CONF
And if I have this, I can deduce this.
So sometimes not all that often we will write this
NOTE CONF
double line here in order to indicate that this is
a rule that goes both ways.
NOTE CONF
So normally rules go downwards.
We start with the assumption.
NOTE CONF
And the rule tells us the conclusion.
If we write a double line, we mean we can
NOTE CONF
also just flip the rule upside down.
And it still works, which is usually not the case.
NOTE CONF
Although in most of our examples it will be.
But in most of logic it's not necessarily the case.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so in the last 30s let me just review
what we have covered today.
NOTE CONF
We've agreed or hopefully we've agreed that we know about
double negation.
NOTE CONF
So two knots are the same as no knots at
all.
NOTE CONF
We've talked about Barbara, which we agreed was valid and
we talked about contra position.
NOTE CONF
So next week we will work on these some more.
So obviously we'll start by reviewing them.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll see lots and lots more syllogisms.
So enjoy FP tomorrow.
NOTE CONF